[AUDIO LOGO]
>>MARLENE SEVEN BREMNER:
These different forces,
as we see in a
hermetic worldview,
they're associated
with the planets.
They work upon us unconsciously.
>>REGINA MEREDITH: These
aren't masses of rocks moving
through the solar system.
They have conscious intelligence
just as Gaia Earth has herself.
>>BREMNER: The more
conscious that we
can become of these influences
and form a relationship
to these archetypal energies
that the planets represent,
the more agency and control
we have over our own destiny.
I began to just apply some
of these different ideas
into my creative practice.
>>REGINA: What you did is so
powerful and beautiful because
it gives the representation
for the rest of us
to be able to see visually.
>>BREMNER: We can
slowly begin to purify,
in an alchemical sense, the
contents of our own inner world
and the contents of our mind.
>>REGINA: Many of you have
heard of the word "hermetics,"
but it remains a lofty concept.
Marlene Seven Bremner
has taken it upon herself
to articulate these texts into
one beautiful volume of work
driven by artistic
renditions of what
came from her dark
night of the soul.
Welcome.
You've done such
beautiful work here,
and there's a tremendous
amount of depth to it.
>>BREMNER: Thank you, Regina.
>>REGINA: And really,
it's like if someone
wants to take hermetics
on, I can't think
of a more wonderful place
than-- the standard on Amazon,
"Corpus Hermeticum,"
anybody can do that.
But I love your book.
This is beautiful.
I would like to
first start out--
because you appear
to be quite young.
And clearly, you got
on your path early.
You lived around the
world, military dad.
But some of it-- let's talk
a little bit about your time
in Germany and
what happened later
in life that really caused you
to go through what I mentioned
earlier, kind of a
dark night of the soul,
so people can get
to know you a bit.
>>BREMNER: Yeah.
Well, I was born in Germany
but didn't live there long.
We left when I was about four.
But I think it was a pretty
formative experience growing up
those four years.
>>REGINA: That imprint of
your being, being born there.
>>BREMNER: Yeah.
And Frankfurt, where
I was born, was also
a very important alchemical
city after the Renaissance.
And a lot of really important
books were published there.
So it feels
significant that that's
where I came into the world.
>>REGINA: Born on that dirt.
>>BREMNER: Yeah.
But yeah, I grew
up in a household
with a very artistic mother
and a very scientific atheist
father.
And we didn't grow
up with religion
because they'd both rejected
it in their own ways.
But my mom was quite
the spiritualist.
So there was a lot of that
influence for me growing up
and felt very connected
with nature as a child
and interested in the polarities
from a young age interestingly.
>>REGINA: Yeah.
That would lead you
right toward hermetics
at one point or another.
It was inevitable.
But what was it,
and on what level
were you interested in
polarity as a very young girl?
>>BREMNER: Well, just the
very basic relationship
between the sun and the moon.
This would feature in
my artwork quite often.
And as I got older, the
union of the opposites
just seemed like an
important concept.
And I don't know
why that came to me.
But it was an unconscious
thing going on at that point.
And as I developed and studied
different spiritual traditions
and different
healing modalities,
I eventually came to
find polarity therapy.
And I was living in Olympia,
and I found a teacher there.
>>REGINA: Olympia, Washington?
>>BREMNER: Mm-hmm.
And started studying
and practicing
polarity therapy,
which is largely
based in hermetic principles
and these ideas of the elements
forming the human body and
the energy of the caduceus
and the chakras and--
>>REGINA: Complementary
types of coming together
for alchemical transformation.
>>BREMNER: Yeah.
And essentially, helping people
to return to their connection
with source and to find the
balance between the polarities
rather than being pulled
by attraction and repulsion
back and forth between us.
>>REGINA: Forever till we die?
>>BREMNER: Exactly.
Yeah.
So that was my
introduction to hermetics.
And it was during the time that
I was still studying polarity
that I was also
introduced to alchemy.
And as you mentioned, I went
through a very dark night
of the soul.
Things were just thrown
upside down for me overnight.
And I didn't know how
to help myself anymore.
Even though I had
all these tools
and I was going to school
for energy medicine
and had all this wonderful
healing energy around me--
>>REGINA: It was like an
emotional shock, trauma?
>>BREMNER: Yeah.
Yeah, it was an emotional
shock and a trauma
and felt like my entire
nervous system had been
rerouted basically overnight.
And so all of the things that
used to help me self-regulate
no longer helped.
So I had to find a
different way through this
because going on long
walks, meditation, going
to yoga classes, all these
things that had been helpful
would actually trigger
panic and anxiety.
>>REGINA: This
whole notion of what
happens when you go
into an emotional shock
and the way it affects the
nervous system and then the way
the nervous system
in turn starts
imprinting the subconscious
mind and starts
creating these patterns.
And it really can become very
illogical, like you said.
Things that used to
make you feel good,
you try to move through that.
And like you said, you start
to feel panic-stricken.
It's like, how has this
been turned upside down?
And we'll talk about
that in a moment.
Continue with your experience.
>>BREMNER: Yeah.
So at the time, I
was just coming back
into my artistic practice.
I'd given it up for a
long time, went to school,
and was studying
energy medicine.
But I decided that I
wanted to start painting.
So I started to teach
myself how to oil-paint.
And specifically,
I didn't want to be
influenced by too many
other artists and stuff.
So I made a point to not--
>>REGINA: Good for you.
>>BREMNER: --look
at a lot of art
and to not take lessons but
to just learn the basics.
And from there, everything
else was trial and error.
And I was also deeply
immersed in my initial studies
of alchemy.
And this was through
the lens of Carl Jung,
so a very psychological
perspective
on the alchemical art.
And I began to just apply
some of these different ideas
into my creative practice.
And it was through
that that I was
able to take these dark
things that I was experiencing
and transform them and
able to take things
from my own unconscious,
express them outwardly
in this spontaneous way.
And then a dialogue began to
unfold between me and my work
and between the paintings
and my inner world.
And it was a very healing
transformative process.
And, for me, this was
a very difficult time,
and it took several
years to get through.
But by the end of it, I
had completely changed.
I'd become a much more grounded,
integrated person because--
>>REGINA: And you had an
offering for the world
through the alchemy of your
own experience and work
transformed into art.
I mean, really amazing art.
>>BREMNER: Yeah.
So everything that I've
written in the book
is really based in that
experiential knowledge
that I gained
through that process
and through going through
these different phases
of transmutation, going into the
dark night of the soul, which,
in alchemy, is
called the nigredo.
And it's associated with
death and with the color black
and with the planet Saturn.
And so these very heavy
Saturnian energies
also with the metal lead.
And it's this process of
going inward and confronting
the darkness within ourselves
but also acknowledging
it and integrating it.
So we don't just see our shadow
and push it away and reject it.
We integrate it.
And it becomes a part of us in
a power that then we can hold.
>>REGINA: Well, the darkness
and the pain informs.
It tells us what has yet to be
healed, what's out of balance,
right?
>>BREMNER: Yeah.
>>REGINA: And so pushing those
feelings and emotions away
is, I find, very detrimental.
It'll find you.
It will come find you
one way or another.
It might take-- it might decide
it needs to settle somewhere
in the body.
>>BREMNER: Oh, yeah.
>>REGINA: It'd come maybe
haunt you in the next lifetime.
But you can't get away from it.
So what you did is so powerful
and beautiful because it
gives the representation
for the rest of us
to be able to see visually.
For me, it's a process of like
a child feel everything, get it
out, just feel
everything in the moment,
and let it pass
where you're crying,
and then you're
laughing, however
long you need to so that it
literally can be released.
But you've taken it
a step far further,
which I think is why you
have all these amazing beings
around you.
You came here to
do important work.
So let's talk about a little bit
because a lot of people right
now--
a lot of people are
suffering right now.
They're in anger.
They're in angst.
They're in confusion.
It's like-- because we are
going through a transformative
process as a species.
And we're trying to punch our
way out of a paper bag a lot
of times.
So let's talk about what you
mentioned a little bit ago.
You had this
experience that started
trashing your nervous system.
So let's talk about
looking at it in the-- you
can go to Jung, hermetics,
but in the context of what
happens when we have
trashed our nervous system
through excessive trauma,
anger, sadness, et cetera,
and how that starts leaching
into and then affecting
other parts of the mind complex.
>>BREMNER: Well, yeah,
these different forces,
as we see in the
hermetic worldview,
they're associated
with the planets.
And they work upon
us unconsciously.
So the planets are
affecting us whether or not
we're conscious of it.
But if we're unconscious of
it, which many people are,
then we're being pulled in these
continuous states of attraction
and repulsion.
And they are driving us and
basically determining our fate.
And the more conscious that we
can become of these influences
and form a relationship to
these archetypal energies
that the planets represent,
the more agency and control
we have over our own destiny
and the more creatively
we can engage with
reality and with our life.
>>REGINA: Yes, because it does
have an actual effect on us
in our own little personal
complex that we carry around.
The axiom, as above
so below, is really
quite literal to what
you're speaking of.
>>BREMNER: Exactly.
>>REGINA: So if we were
able to rather than look
at the model in your
seventh-grade astronomy class
of balls and sticks and saw
each one of these planets
as a massive archetypal
being that each represents
an opportunity for growth,
learning, and experience
in our solar system.
And it affects us directly
on Earth like benevolent
teachers-- even
Saturn, even Pluto--
as benevolent teachers.
And then I like to take
it down to the personal.
So you get a hit physical--
and you get a hit emotionally.
Now your electrical and
nervous system is all trashed.
Now it's starting to rewire
some kind of a memory and a vent
in the subconscious, which is
going to come back and keep
influencing you until it has
been transformed such as what
you did.
If you care to explain
that a little bit more so
people understand what
happens after trauma.
And you can turn to
Jung if you want.
>>BREMNER: Yeah.
Well, I think often
what happens is
we have these traumatic events.
And, yes, we keep getting pulled
back to them in different ways
in order to heal them
and integrate them.
And another thing
that happens is
we reject the parts of ourselves
that we don't want to see,
that we don't want to look at.
And then we end up projecting
those outward into the world.
And so we see the enemy
everywhere outside of us.
And we encounter all these
problems in our relationships
and in our work life and these
negative expressions of things
that are actually within us
that we've completely rejected.
And until we're able to
reclaim those shadow aspects
and recognize them as
parts of ourselves,
we're going to
continue to do that,
and they'll just keep
popping up in new forms.
And so that's one
way if that happens.
>>REGINA: And I think
right now whichever
of the planetary
beings' archetypes
are influencing us
the most, I think
we have some good Saturn
happening right now,
a fair amount of that
affecting people.
And maybe you can explain
that a little bit.
We really are going to find
ourselves in this kind of angst
for the time being.
That's what the time is calling
for is to, like you said,
look at the uncomfortable
stuff in us and around us.
And I think just to
mirror what you said,
so if we're seeing
a lot of enemies,
if the world has become our
enemy and that person who
believes that is our
enemy, that's something
that we need to go inside for.
>>BREMNER: Yeah.
And also just to see
where we're getting
stuck in certain mental
loops because our thoughts
do influence reality.
They do influence the
experiences that we have.
And so if we're continually
having a certain conversation
in our head and oftentimes
it'll be a negative conversation
or a certain thought
loop that we're stuck in,
those things are
more likely to come
into being because we're
putting more energy into them
and spending more
time focusing on them.
But we can also look to these
archetypal planetary energies.
And so, say, we're stuck on some
sort of scarcity mentality--
>>REGINA: Which
people are right now.
>>BREMNER: A lot of people are.
And I myself have gone
through this many times.
And, for me, it's something
that I still work through.
This isn't an easy thing
to do, but we can slowly
begin to purify in
an alchemical sense
the contents of
our own inner world
and the contents of our mind.
So this is both
emotional and mental
and these cyclical processes.
If we think of air and
water within a vessel
and a distillation taking
place, for instance,
where the water is heating
up, and the vapors are rising,
and then they're
condensing and cooling,
and you get the essence being
extracted from that process.
So we can do that
within ourselves,
within the vessel of our
body where we continually
clarify and refine the
contents of our inner world.
And this is a process.
It takes a lot of time.
>>REGINA: It does take time.
And I'm all for
doing what you can
by way of getting to the
grounded 3D level of things
and looking at it from that
possibility to say, OK,
if all else fails, what's left?
And then from the
what's-left place,
start rebuilding and
building from there.
And I've always found a
kind of freeing that--
a freedom that occurs in
taking into consider--
the worst-case scenarios, for
example, considering them.
And then the scarcity
subject changes.
It becomes altered.
It might be that
one's vision of what
they thought their life was
going to look like may not
look like that in the moment.
That's ego for the most part.
If we let go of that
and say, how can I
be safe and happy and
productive and let
go of the egoic
vision of it, you'll
find there's a
well of creativity
of how that can happen.
>>BREMNER: Oh, yeah.
>>REGINA: Yeah.
And so then the scarcity
starts backing off.
And once that backs off
and the fear backs off,
all the creativity
pops in, and you
end up with beautiful work
like this, for example.
So I was going to say while
we're in that little arena
before we go to your artwork,
can you talk a little bit
about the nature of
Saturn influence,
a little bit about the
nature of Venus influence?
Because you do have
some influences
in this book in the art.
>>BREMNER: Yeah.
So Saturn has to do with
limitations and heaviness
and inertia.
Saturn's a very
slow-moving planet.
And it's considered to be cold
and dry because of its distance
from the sun and the moon.
And so it has these effects
upon us, cold and dry.
And when we think of the
first stage in alchemy being
associated with Saturn, the
nigredo, or the blackening,
it can feel like a dryness,
like a coldness, like you're--
>>REGINA: Like you're
not feeling supported.
>>BREMNER: Exactly.
>>REGINA: There's no warmth
and no incubator there.
>>BREMNER: Yeah.
Like you're just shivering
in the cold in the dark
and waiting for some kind
of light or some warmth
to help revive you.
But that's such
an essential part
of the process is to be able
to sit with that discomfort
and, like you said, to look
at the worst-case scenario
and to just say, OK,
what's left after that?
And in that process, we can
get in touch with something
that's eternal within us, that
essence of who and what we are.
And I think that's
really the gift of Saturn
is once we can
face our mortality
and all of our fears
and limitations,
then that opens up a whole
world of possibility--
>>REGINA: Absolutely.
>>BREMNER: --and freedom.
>>REGINA: So if we can imagine
Saturn as a benevolent teacher
again, it's like sometimes
we have to go and take
a little algebra.
It's not all art
class all the time.
>>BREMNER: Yeah.
And Saturn is also
about discipline.
>>REGINA: Yes, exactly.
>>BREMNER: Yeah.
Dedication and being able
to see things through.
So there's many
positive qualities.
>>REGINA: Yes.
So that's the being Saturn.
Let's talk about
the being of Venus.
>>BREMNER: Of Venus?
Well, Venus is associated
with the heart chakra
and with the heart, in general,
and with love and the metal
copper and the
propensity toward union.
So essentially, Venus
represents that force
in the universe that
brings things together
that coagulates and that binds.
And she helps us to connect with
beauty and our aesthetic sense
and our values and also money
and finances but everything
that makes us feel luxurious
and helps us to feel
the splendor of being alive
and the joy of creativity,
the joy of being alive.
>>REGINA: Yes.
Certainly, one of-- I think
most of the people watching
this right now,
Venus is definitely
one of their favorite planets.
No doubt about it.
And were you going to
say something from that?
>>BREMNER: Oh, but they
all have their dark side,
all the planets.
>>REGINA: Let's talk
about the dark side.
I don't know that
we want to touch
on the dark side of Saturn
because the light side is
hard enough.
But let's talk about
the dark side of Venus.
>>BREMNER: Well, the
dark side of Venus
might be experienced by someone
as jealousy or envy or pride.
And there's a lot of
mythology going along
with Venus and her more
ancient forms in the Sumerian
and Babylonian Ishtar and Inanna
who was also a warrior goddess,
and in some cases and
some of the myths,
very vengeful and angry.
And I love the myth of Inanna.
And I talk about
this in the book
because she basically hasn't
acknowledged her own shadow
side.
And so she feels compelled
to go into the underworld
to meet her dark sister
who's Ereshkigal,
the queen of the underworld.
And in the process, she has
to give up all of her power.
She has to give up
heaven and Earth
and be stripped of all
of her seven powers.
So essentially, going
down to the bare essence
of who she is and,
in her nakedness,
kneeling before the
queen of the underworld.
And she's judged
down there and turned
into a rotting piece of flesh
upon the wall of the underworld
and not allowed to leave.
And basically, she goes
through the whole death process
while she's facing
her shadow aspect
in the form of Ereshkigal.
And in order to leave, she
has to call upon divine aid.
But she can't just leave.
Someone has to take her place.
And so she goes back
up to the upper world
and tries to figure out who's
going to take her place.
And it ends up being her
husband who has taken her throne
and shows no sign of grieving
for her death or anything.
>>REGINA: OK.
There's the dark side--
>>BREMNER: That's the
dark side of Venus.
>>REGINA: --of Venus.
With that because--
I think this-- we're going
to go to your artwork
now and take people
through your artwork
because I just think they're
going to be enchanted by it.
But the first piece
we're looking at
is called the death
of the profane.
And it speaks to what you
just said, the putrification.
Without that, there
is no generation.
So explain what we're
seeing with this skull
and with the blossoms and the
snakes coming down in the top.
We see the sun and moon.
Tell us what we're seeing here.
>>BREMNER: Well, this is like
a mirror for people to gaze
into, that confrontation with
mortality and memento mori,
remember death and--
>>REGINA: And
Inanna having to go
through this process
of becoming, well,
putrefying, basically.
>>BREMNER: Yeah.
We see in the
painting a depiction
of the caduceus,
the interweaving
serpents of the active and
passive energies of the body.
And these are forming a
ouroboros around this skull
and around this
golden circle, which
represents the fullness,
the wholeness of the moment
that we all exist in,
especially when we can
confront our fear of mortality.
>>REGINA: Yes, and highly
symbolic in a hermetic sense,
all of it.
Beautiful.
OK.
And now we come to concordia
oppositorum, right?
>>BREMNER: Yes.
Concordia oppositorum.
This is a truce
between the opposites.
They are--
>>REGINA: Between the
light and the dark?
>>BREMNER: Between the
light and the dark,
between chaos and
order, or you could even
say between Saturn
and Jupiter who I
see representing those forces.
And they are not
locked together.
They are each in their
own ouroboros shape.
But they're intertwined, and
they can let go at any moment.
So they're agreeing
to be at peace.
>>REGINA: But they seem to
consume each other at the tail.
>>BREMNER: A little bit, yeah.
>>REGINA: Is that more
just locking together
in their own wholeness?
>>BREMNER: Yeah,
they're locked together
in their own wholeness.
>>REGINA: Right.
OK.
So I want to take a moment now
before we go to the next play
because I was going to ask
you to go into the light
and dark of Jupiter.
>>BREMNER: Oh, yeah.
The light and dark--
>>REGINA: Because
everyone loves Jupiter.
It means, oh, I have
money coming my way.
And we bring everything down
to its most base levels,
base materials.
So tell us about Jupiter.
>>BREMNER: Well,
yeah, that would
be the light side of Jupiter.
Expansion, joviality, joy
for life, money and riches,
growth, all of these
wonderful things.
But the dark side
of Jupiter would
be a tendency towards
excess or gluttony or lust.
And Jupiter is associated--
>>REGINA: Greed.
>>BREMNER: Greed as well, yeah.
Jupiter is associated
with the sacral chakra.
And this is our water chakra.
And this has to do with
relationships and emotions
and creativity and sexuality.
So the negative
expressions that can
come when that chakra
is out of balance
are associated with those
negative qualities of Jupiter
as well, the dark
side of Jupiter.
So, yeah, again, lust and--
>>REGINA: And greed
and envy coveting.
And anyone along
the way, since we're
talking about this in the truest
sense, these are entities.
These aren't masses
of rocks moving
through the solar system.
They have conscious intelligence
just as Gaia Earth has herself.
So if we look at that, anyone
can go and look at their chart
and see how their Venus
is situated right now
or their Jupiter, Saturn is
situated in their own chart
as we move through
these times cosmically.
And this is helpful to have
this understanding of the light
and dark.
And you can tell if
there's a train or a square
there where your
Jupiter is, for example.
OK.
So here, we have the
composition of the waters.
This is very powerful.
Tell us what we're
looking at here.
>>BREMNER: Well, this painting
took about eight months
to complete.
And, for me, it
was the first time
that I allowed myself to
paint something spontaneously.
So it wasn't premeditated.
I didn't plan it out.
I just started applying
paint to this large panel
and seeing what emerged.
And as forms and faces and
things started to emerge--
>>REGINA: Lots of faces in here.
This little owl up above.
Yeah.
>>BREMNER: As they
started to emerge,
then I could say, oh, that
looks kind of like this,
and that makes me
think about that.
And it would be
influenced by dreams
that I was having and
experiences that I
was having while I was
working on the painting.
So it was very much a process
of discovery and unfolding.
>>REGINA: Yeah.
In fact, you have here-- it's
described as the dissolution
and upwelling of
the unconscious--
>>BREMNER: Exactly.
>>REGINA: --merging the
inner and outer worlds.
>>BREMNER: Yeah.
And that's a technique
that the surrealists used
to access and express
the unconscious
was to paint or to
draw in a way that
was very automatic and
unfiltered and allowing
the unconscious
to express itself
just as it is without regulating
it with the conscious mind.
>>REGINA: Without
overanalyzing it.
Up in the upper right corner,
we have an urn with water,
it appears, pouring out of it.
We have a little owl
just to the left of that.
What is this urn representing?
>>BREMNER: Well, that whole
right side of the painting
represents the inner world
and the role of the priestess
and the connection
with the divine
whereas the left
side of the painting
is more about the
body and nature.
And the whole painting
is about the integration
of these things.
And so that priestess is
receiving the divine waters
of the cosmos, of the heavens.
And she's receiving
it into her own crown.
>>REGINA: OK.
Now we'll go to the light--
this is one of my favorite ones.
I just love it.
It makes me happy to look at it.
It brings about feelings,
for me, of happiness.
The light bearer.
This is called the cross
rose in the Garden of Venus.
And the explanation for
it is the light bearer
points the wonders to
the waters of renewal
and away from the
tail of the scorpion.
>>BREMNER: So this is a
Venus-themed painting.
Many people will
recognize her symbol there
on the altar cloth.
And Lucifer, the light
bearer, is another name
for Venus as the morning star.
And so in that role,
she's guiding us--
she's heralding the dawn.
She's guiding us out of
the dark night of the soul.
And that's another
role of Venus is
while she does make this
underworld journey when she
goes through her
retrograde phase
and disappears for a time,
she also draws us back
into the light.
And so this painting
is about that role
of Venus as the light
bearer and the choice
that we have to either go
into the Garden of Venus
or to go towards the
tail of the scorpion.
>>REGINA: Yes.
I think most people can just
feel the weight of those words.
OK.
Here's Venus again.
Now this one is more
like the anonymous story
you were telling.
OK.
So we're talking about
"The Book of Blue Vitriol."
Venus descends
into the underworld
to be reconciled
with her animus.
And tell us, as we
go into this, what
the rabbits represent in this.
And here, we see at
the bottom a bunny
with her little offspring.
>>BREMNER: Well, rabbits
are associated with Venus
and also with the moon.
Venus has to do also with
generation and multiplicity.
And so you see the
seven children,
the seven baby rabbits
there with the mother
who's in the underworld.
And then the male
rabbit, jackrabbit,
is more connected with
this archetypal father
figure that's represented
in the rocks behind him.
I think I chose the
rabbits because I'd
been seeing a lot of
jackrabbits in New Mexico.
And it was a new creature
for me to encounter
and to work with spiritually.
So I wanted to
honor that in a way.
And the painting itself brought
me on a complete underworld
journey.
And I started it with Venus--
>>REGINA: Yeah, you can see
elements of the underworld,
and you can see the skulls,
and the ancient decrepit ebony
hands.
>>BREMNER: Exactly.
Yeah.
So it started when
Venus was the evening
star when she's associated
more with being a lover.
And then as I progressed
with the painting,
she disappeared and went through
her whole retrograde phase.
And when she re-emerged, that's
when I completed the painting.
So it was like going through
the entire underworld
journey with Venus while
completing the painting
and painting all of
those spooky rocks
and expressing that darkness.
>>REGINA: Yes,
that's not the one
I would choose to put on my
wall, but some people would.
So let's talk a moment--
you just mentioned
it, Venus in retrograde.
We always think of
mercury in retrograde
and what that does to
screw up our meetings
with people and deals we've
made and flights and so forth.
What happens when
Venus is in retrograde?
>>BREMNER: I think when
Venus is in retrograde,
it's helpful to look at the last
time that she was in retrograde
and to look at what signs
she's retrograding in
and to reflect back on what
was going on in our life
the last time she retrograded
in that sign or the last time
she retrograded in general.
And it will often, I think, have
to do with love relationships
and relationships in general
and different healing
that we need--
>>REGINA: To go back
and revisit these.
>>BREMNER: Yeah, healing that we
need to do related to the past.
And yeah, looking back.
Kind of like with mercury as
a looking back and review.
>>REGINA: It's where we
tend to learn everything.
Mercury and retrograde can
make things very inconvenient.
Phoenix and Venus
in retrograde really
can take you more
to the mat, again,
reviewing things
that have caused--
like we talked about earlier,
trauma and so forth now.
OK.
Now we go to plate
six in your book.
It's called emergence.
And the anima emerges
from the desert chalice
as the spirit ascends
from the corpus.
And that looks like
a self-portrait.
That's you.
>>BREMNER: Yeah.
Many of them are pretty
much self-portraits,
whether they're
figures or animals.
Yeah, this was one of my
first successfully completed
paintings.
It took me a total
of three years,
not because it took
that long to paint,
but because I had to let
it sit and gestate and--
>>REGINA: Come back to it.
>>BREMNER: And it was very
much about me learning how
to express my own creativity
and to come out of this--
>>REGINA: Emerge
from the desert.
>>BREMNER: Emerge
from the desert, yeah.
>>REGINA: In almost
infertile soil.
>>BREMNER: Yeah, exactly.
And to allow that
to be expressed.
>>REGINA: And then up above,
you have a little monkey.
>>BREMNER: Yes.
So the monkey represents
the ape of the mind.
>>REGINA: Oh, the monkey mind.
>>BREMNER: The
monkey mind, yeah.
>>REGINA: Now, that's my least
favorite part of being human.
>>BREMNER: The monkey mind?
>>REGINA: Yeah.
I don't like to indulge it.
And, I mean, this is
something that I think
we have to learn how to manage.
And when I was younger, I would
experience more monkey mind.
Now when it happens at all, it's
just, to me, almost grotesque
because it's one of the loops.
And I feel like I want
to run as fast as I
can to get away from that.
And many, many people at
different phases in their life,
especially if there's trauma,
something shocking, unexpected
can end up in monkey mind,
trying to reconcile it.
So, for you, besides doing
your artwork, what would
you have to say by
way of words of wisdom
to people who find
themselves locked
in the same dialogue over and
over in their brain monkey
mind?
>>BREMNER: Well, I mean,
I think finding a way
to express that outwardly and
to get it out of your mind.
So I think writing can be
really helpful, to just
write those thoughts out.
And then that can help you
see how ridiculous they
are a little bit to get
them outside of yourself.
But also, I think
meditation is really just
such a crucial part of being--
>>REGINA: Absolutely,
of calming it.
>>BREMNER: Yeah.
Learning how to simply breathe
and to tune into the body
and to what's actually
present with you in the moment
because all of these
stories and these loops
that we're running through
these mental loops,
they're not actually happening.
It's all in your mind.
So if you can just tune in
to what's actually present,
look at the physical world
around you, feel your body,
feel your energy, these things
can help us deactivate that.
>>REGINA: I agree.
And I think also another tool
is, if we go into the feeling
that we have where the monkey
mind and the loops are going,
there's something in us that's
getting something out of it.
And it's usually
something a little darker.
If we can stop ourselves for a
moment and when we're grinding
on this thought, think of where
is this taking us in our body
and in our emotions
and look at it and say,
I'm now in a habitual pattern
because some part of me
is being fed that's
liking this stuff.
>>BREMNER: Yeah.
And sometimes we
like to feel pain.
>>REGINA: And we
want to feel pain.
And so to recognize
that and say,
do I want to keep feeling this?
>>BREMNER: Exactly.
But yeah, sometimes
that feeling of pain
is more familiar and more
comfortable than what it would
feel like to just be calm.
>>REGINA: Exactly.
And so we get to keep to that.
>>BREMNER: And so we
get addicted to that.
>>REGINA: Yeah, we get
addicted to those feelings.
Yes.
Very good.
OK.
Here we go.
The lord of
utterance and justice
pierces the scales
of the crocodile.
This is called "The
Transfiguration of Thoth,
Squaring the Circle."
>>BREMNER: Yes.
This one has a lot of imagery
from Olympia, Washington, where
I lived, the Capitol Lake,
and the Capitol Building.
And I would spend hours
walking around that lake
and reflecting on
hermetic principles
and looking at the
sky and the water
and the reflections of
the above and the below.
>>REGINA: Well, your earrings
right now, the ankh, which--
>>BREMNER:
>>REGINA: --is
featured prominently.
>>BREMNER: So, yeah,
that was born out
of that phase in my life.
And I wanted to do a
depiction of Thoth.
And I wanted to represent
him in the three
aspects of the Egyptian Thoth,
the Greek Hermes, and the Roman
Mercurius, but also to
make it a self-portrait
because I was forming a
relationship with this deity,
with this energy, and wanting
to experience it through my body
and through my own energy field.
And so that was what
happened with the painting.
Even though I initially wanted
to do a traditional portrait
of Thoth, it ended up being this
surreal spontaneous painting,
which was far more
effective in a magical sense
than if I had just done a
simple traditional portrait.
>>REGINA: Yes, I
agree with that.
Very powerful.
And, again, very central to
hermeticism, this being who
is essentially the cosmic
archivist or scribe
for knowledge.
>>BREMNER: Yes,
the god of wisdom.
>>REGINA: That's right.
>>BREMNER: Yeah.
And all the sacred art.
>>REGINA: Yes.
OK.
Now we're here to the
gates of paradise.
Of course, everybody likes this.
Who doesn't?
The gates of paradise,
the two peacocks.
Tell us what this heaven and
Earth gates of paradise means.
We see gentility.
We see beauty.
We see the energy
rising, pointing upward.
Let's talk about that.
>>BREMNER: Well, it's a
very Venusian painting.
And it's centered
around the heart chakra.
And so all of the
plants and the herbs
incorporated in the painting all
have different correspondences
with the heart chakra
and with the heart
and with the circulatory
system, all different medicinal
and healing effects.
And so that painting, for me,
was about healing the heart
and opening the heart
and connecting the above
and the below through the heart
because the heart chakra is
the center point between the
upper chakras, which connect us
with our cosmic
source and the divine,
and the lower chakras
that connect us
with the body and
our physicality.
>>REGINA: And where it
said the spark of life
exists, and when it
withdraws, we're dead.
>>BREMNER: Yeah.
>>REGINA: It's kind of simple.
That's the breath of life, the
center of the breath of life,
the anchor for the soul.
OK.
Now when we go to plate
nine, it comes together.
We're talking about
the conjunction
of the sun and the moon
where the whole picture,
very in-your-face
literally, comes
together fierce and gentle.
>>BREMNER: Well, this
is an interesting one
because it's through
the lens of Jupiter,
but it's about the conjunction
of the sun and the moon.
So I think this conjunction of
the opposites-- the masculine,
the feminine,
positive, the negative,
the active and the passive--
they take place for all of the
different planetary energies.
And as we go through
life, we confront
these different
aspects of ourselves
and learn how to
bring them to balance.
And so, for me, that painting
was bringing Jupiter to balance
and finding that perfect
union of the expansive
and contracted
qualities of Jupiter
represented by the
lion and the unicorn.
>>REGINA: Very powerful.
And the one thing I wanted
to talk to you about is--
your art, I mean, each piece
has its own emotional impact
on an individual looking
at it or mental impact,
either one, spiritual impact.
And you can find that you're
attracted or repulsed.
But let's talk about
something else entirely
because I'm seeing a
rise of it, and there
has been for a long
time, for decades now.
But a rise in what I consider
to be truly profane art and not
just asymmetry because
yours is very--
this is symmetrical.
Your art is always
representing both.
It's symmetrical.
And asymmetry and truly what
dark and most grotesque imagery
and such that's coming out of
the psyche right now through
a lot of artwork--
and it always has--
it just seems like
there's an abundance
of it right now even in some
of the-- a lot of the stuff
coming out of
Hollywood and films.
What happens when you put
asymmetrical grotesque art
out for the public even
though it's your own journey?
Which you have not
done here, by the way.
It has beauty within
it, within each theme.
>>BREMNER: I think
for some people,
it's really necessary
in a cathartic sense
to express that darkness
and to acknowledge it
and to give it form.
And I think it's also
therapeutic for others
to view it and to observe it.
So I don't necessarily
see that as--
>>REGINA: You don't have
any judgment around it--
>>BREMNER: No, I don't
have any judgment.
>>REGINA: --where I do.
Obviously, you can tell I do.
>>BREMNER: Yeah.
I mean, I think as
artists, we are charged
with inspiring and uplifting.
And, to me, as a hermeticist,
conveying divine principles
through the work that I do.
And I do it for myself,
but my ultimate hope
is that it's helpful
to other people,
that it's not just for me.
>>REGINA: Right.
And everybody has a right
to express what they wish.
And on that note,
here, you write,
"A magician is a master
of their divine will."
That's what a true magician is.
So the question is how to tap
into and listen to divine will.
We can't be a master
if we can't hear it.
>>BREMNER: Exactly.
So if you've got that
monkey mind rolling--
>>REGINA: Yeah, exactly.
>>BREMNER: --it's going
to be kind of hard.
So learning how to
invoke stillness
and to create space
within ourselves so
that divine aspect of
ourselves can inhabit our body
and can be there.
But so long as
we're all filled up
with these stories and
ideas about who we are
and how the world
is supposed to be,
that divine essence is going
to have a hard time expressing
itself within you.
So making space
within and helping
yourself to release
these stories
that we get so attached to.
>>REGINA: Very well put
because it's as simple as that.
The fact is the subconscious
is there, it feeds itself,
and it's there to protect us.
Incarnation to
incarnation, it travels
with us with all the
experience that we've ever had.
So, of course, we're going to
see a thing that has harmed us
in the past and be fearful.
But we don't have
to tell ourselves
stories about it day after
day, lifetime after lifetime
because, in that where the
soul is trying to speak through
is much more subtle,
much more beautiful,
whispering through
all the time to us.
And yet, if all this has a
grip on us, we can't hear it.
>>BREMNER: Exactly.
>>REGINA: So I think
you put it beautifully,
so being still enough
that we can hear it.
And the other thing is
expressing ourselves
artistically because a lot
of people think, oh yeah,
she can do that, she's talented,
I don't have any talent.
Talk about the value you see
in finding your way to art
even if you feel you
don't have talent.
>>BREMNER: Well, the way I
see it, we are all creators.
That is our gift as human
beings, each and every one
of us.
That doesn't necessarily mean
we're all going to be artists.
I think it's great if we can
find an artistic way to--
>>REGINA: If you can
pick up a crayon.
>>BREMNER: --express ourselves.
Exactly.
>>REGINA: Draw a circle
and run through it.
>>BREMNER: We don't
have to do it for money.
We don't have to do it
for other people to see.
And we also don't have to make
physical visual art or music
or sculpture.
We can make our life
into a work of art.
We can be creative
about the way that we
live our life, about
that we arrange
all of the different aspects
of our life and relate to them.
>>REGINA: I agree with that.
And back to the
physical art, there
is something that happens in
his release, the Waldorf system.
I think Rudolf Steiner really
captured this a great deal
in his anthroposophical
educational system.
And that has to do with--
doesn't matter who you are.
When you draw a circle,
something is happening.
When you draw straight lines or
lines that cross or a square,
something is happening
within the being.
So I think it's worth it to pick
up a watercolor set or crayon
or whatever and just
let your hand doodle
and see where it
goes because it is
tapping into something
deeper that's
trying to express itself.
If it's really ugly,
just don't show it to me.
[LAUGHTER]
>>BREMNER: We can learn
so much about ourselves
by just allowing that
expression to come through
without judgment.
>>REGINA: Absolutely.
So when you were a little
kid, were you into daisies,
or did you do snakes?
What did you do when you
were a little kid when
you were doodling?
>>BREMNER: I really
liked to draw big cats.
>>REGINA: Yeah?
Oh, interesting.
>>BREMNER: Yeah.
Big cats, trees, the sun
and the moon, rivers.
>>REGINA: Good.
Sometimes that helps us know
you a little bit better.
That's wonderful.
Well, you were definitely
born to do what you do.
And so thank you for
your due diligence.
And sorry you had to go
through such a tough dark night
of the soul to get there.
But it's been very
valuable for others
to see the expression of it.
>>BREMNER: And valuable
for me as well.
>>REGINA: Yes.
Thank you so much, Seven.
>>BREMNER: Thank you, Regina.
>>REGINA: For those of you
looking to understand hermetics
more deeply, "Hermetic
Philosophy and Creative
Alchemy" would be
a wonderful place
to start, a great
course of study.
Until next time, thank
you for joining us here
on "Open Minds."
[AUDIO LOGO]